.. _YTEP-0003:

YTEP-0003: Standardizing field names
====================================

Abstract
--------

Created: December 11, 2012

Author: Casey Stark, Nathan Goldbaum, Matt Turk

Let's clean up field names in yt, ex "SoundSpeed" -> "sound_speed". The
proposed work will serve to remove Enzo-isms and encourage more consistent
field names across frontends.

Status
------

This has been implemented.

Project Management Links
------------------------

yt 3.0 goals doc https://docs.google.com/document/d/17Q-rbmTj9PyaTgtN1h6C8vqoWeIZjw_OjFbQp8L3Tkg/edit

Universal field names doc https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Qbt6z27S8VWh8h0kOx--ZYih4BDFAgGlH9pE55I51So/edit

Detailed Description
--------------------

Background
^^^^^^^^^^

The universal field names are PascalCased, while lowercase_underscored names
are more standard in Python.

Solution
^^^^^^^^

The field names must be updated to lowercase_underscored format.  This means all
of the common field names, frontend-specific field names, and all references to
field names elsewhere in the code base need to be updated.

Additionally, we will take the opportunity to reorganize the field definitions.
Currently all of the field definitions live in the monolithic
``universal_fields.py`` file, which in yt 2.6 is just shy of 1700 lines long.
In the reference implimentation, we have created a new top-level namespace,
``yt.fields``.  The ``fields`` module is container for a number of submodules
that contain field definitions or macros to create classes of field
definitions.  Currently, the following submodules are attributes of ``yt.fields``:

* ``angular_momentum``
   Gas and particle angular momentum fields and field creation macros.
* ``fluid_fields``
   Useful fields that are simple functions of the primitive variables in a
   hydrodynamic simulation.  `cell_mass`, `sound_speed`, `pressure`, `entropy`,
   and `kinetic_energy` all live here.
* ``geometric_fields`` 
   Fields that are functions only of the geometry of the data.  This includes
   `radius`, `x`, `y`, `z`, curvilinear coordinat fields, `zeros`, `ones`, and
   `grid_level`.
* ``magnetic_fields``
   Derived fields useful for analyzing simulation that include magnetic fields.
* ``particle_fields``
   Particle derived fields, including all non-local particle deposition fields
   and local fields that are functions of primitive particle properties.
* ``species_fields``
   Fields for chemical species.  This is currently a stub.
* ``vector_operations``
   Fields that are the gradient, divergence or curl of another field as well as
   macros for setting up these fields.
* ``universal_fields``
   Fields that have so far not been assigned to one of the other field
   submodules.  Eventually this module will be removed once the remaining fields
   have been reorganized.

Additionally, the ``fields`` module now contains the logic for field detection
as well as the `DerivedField` class.


Testing
^^^^^^^

The existing unit testing framework as well as an updated set of field detection
tests.  If there are additional fixes required in untested parts of the code
base, we will update them as we find them.

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

We will provide a compatibility layer, allowing yt to map from the old field
names to the new ones.  This compatibility layer will not be enabled by default.

Right now, one can turn it on via the `_setup_deprecated_fields` function:

.. code-block:: python

   from yt.mods import *
   pf = load('IsolatedGalaxy/galaxy0030/galaxy0030')
   pf._setup_deprecated_fields()

In the future we might also enable this via a config parameter.

Field Names
-----------

Naming rules:
  - must be lowercase underscored.
  - should be as verbose as possible.
  - should not include units.
  - vector fields are separated into 4 scalar fields with endings _x, _y, _z,
    and _magnitude.

This is a listing of all field names currently defined in the yt-3.0
universal_fields module and the proposed replacement names.

======================================  =======================================
            Current name                              Proposal
======================================  =======================================
GridLevel                               grid_level
GridIndices                             grid_indices
OnesOverDx                              ones_over_dx
Ones                                    ones
CellsPerBin                             cells_per_bin
SoundSpeed                              sound_speed
RadialMachNumber                        radial_mach_number
MachNumber                              mach_number
CourantTimeStep                         courant_time_step
ParticleVelocityMagnitude               particle_velocity_magnitude
VelocityMagnitude                       velocity_magnitude
TangentialOverVelocityMagnitude         tangential_over_velocity_magnitude
Pressure                                pressure
Entropy                                 entropy
sph_r                                   spherical_r
sph_theta                               spherical_theta
sph_phi                                 spherical_phi
cyl_R                                   cylindrical_r
cyl_RCode                               *remove* (unit duplicate)
cyl_z                                   cylindrical_z
cyl_theta                               cylindrical_theta
DiskAngle                               *remove* (replaced by theta)
Height                                  *remove* (replaced by z)
HeightAU                                *remove* (unit duplicate)
cyl_RadialVelocity                      cylindrical_radial_velocity
cyl_RadialVelocityABS                   cylindrical_radial_velocity_absolute
cyl_RadialVelocityKMS                   *remove* (unit duplicate)
cyl_RadialVelocityKMSABS                *remove* (unit duplicate)
cyl_TangentialVelocity                  cylindrical_tangential_velocity
cyl_TangentialVelocityABS               cylindrical_tangential_velocity_absolute
cyl_TangentialVelocityKMS               *remove* (unit duplicate)
cyl_TangentialVelocityKMSABS            *remove* (unit duplicate)
DynamicalTime                           dynamical_time
JeansMassMsun                           jeans_mass (possible unit change)
CellMass                                cell_mass
CellMassMsun                            *remove* (unit duplicate)
CellMassCode                            *remove* (unit duplicate)
TotalMass                               total_mass
TotalMassMsun                           *remove* (unit duplicate)
StarMassMsun                            star_mass (possible unit change)
Matter_Density                          matter_density
ComovingDensity                         comoving_density
Overdensity                             overdensity
DensityPerturbation                     density_perturbation
Baryon_Overdensity                      baryon_overdensity
WeakLensingConvergence                  weak_lensing_convergence
CellVolumeCode                          *remove* (unit duplicate)
CellVolumeMpc                           *remove* (unit duplicate)
CellVolume                              cell_volume
ChandraEmissivity                       chandra_emissivity
XRayEmissivity                          xray_emissivity
SZKinetic                               sz_kinetic
SZY                                     szy
AveragedDensity                         averaged_density
DivV                                    div_v
AbsDivV                                 div_v_absolute
Contours                                contours
tempContours                            temp_contours
SpecificAngularMomentumX                specific_angular_momentum_x
SpecificAngularMomentumY                specific_angular_momentum_y
SpecificAngularMomentumZ                specific_angular_momentum_z
AngularMomentumX                        angular_momentum_x
AngularMomentumY                        angular_momentum_y
AngularMomentumZ                        angular_momentum_z
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumX        particle_specific_angular_momentum_x
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumY        particle_specific_angular_momentum_y
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumZ        particle_specific_angular_momentum_z
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumXKMSMPC  *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumYKMSMPC  *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleSpecificAngularMomentumZKMSMPC  *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleAngularMomentumX                particle_angular_momentum_x
ParticleAngularMomentumY                particle_angular_momentum_y
ParticleAngularMomentumZ                particle_angular_momentum_z
ParticleRadius                          particle_radius
Radius                                  radius
RadiusMpc                               *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiusMpc                       *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiuskpc                       *remove* (unit duplicate)
Radiuskpc                               *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiuskpch                      *remove* (unit duplicate)
Radiuskpch                              *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiuspc                        *remove* (unit duplicate)
Radiuspc                                *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiusAU                        *remove* (unit duplicate)
RadiusAU                                *remove* (unit duplicate)
ParticleRadiusCode                      *remove* (unit duplicate)
RadiusCode                              *remove* (unit duplicate)
RadialVelocity                          radial_velocity
RadialVelocityABS                       radial_velocity_absolute
RadialVelocityKMS                       *remove* (unit duplicate)
RadialVelocityKMSABS                    *remove* (unit duplicate)
TangentialVelocity                      tangential_velocity
CuttingPlaneVelocityX                   cutting_plane_velocity_x
CuttingPlaneVelocityY                   cutting_plane_velocity_y
CuttingPlaneBX                          cutting_plane_bx
CuttingPlaneBy                          cutting_plane_by
MeanMolecularWeight                     mean_molecular_weight
JeansMassMsun                           *remove* (duplicate)
particle_density                        particle_density
MagneticEnergy                          magnetic_energy
BMagnitude                              b_magnitude
PlasmaBeta                              plasma_beta
MagneticPressure                        magnetic_pressure
BPoloidal                               b_poloidal
BToroidal                               b_toroidal
BRadial                                 b_radial
VorticitySquared                        vorticity_squared
gradPressureX                           grad_pressure_x
gradPressureY                           grad_pressure_y
gradPressureZ                           grad_pressure_z
gradPressureMagnitude                   grad_pressure_magnitude
gradDensityX                            grad_density_x
gradDensityY                            grad_density_y
gradDensityZ                            grad_density_z
gradDensityMagnitude                    grad_density_magnitude
BaroclinicVorticityX                    baroclinic_vorticity_x
BaroclinicVorticityY                    baroclinic_vorticity_y
BaroclinicVorticityZ                    baroclinic_vorticity_z
BaroclinicVorticityMagnitude            baroclinic_vorticity_magnitude
VorticityX                              vorticity_x
VorticityY                              vorticity_y
VorticityZ                              vorticity_z
VorticityMagnitude                      vorticity_magnitude
VorticityStretchingX                    vorticity_stretching_x
VorticityStretchingY                    vorticity_stretching_y
VorticityStretchingZ                    vorticity_stretching_z
VorticityStretchingMagnitude            vorticity_stretching_magnitude
VorticityGrowthX                        vorticity_growth_x
VorticityGrowthY                        vorticity_growth_y
VorticityGrowthZ                        vorticity_growth_z
VorticityGrowthMagnitude                vorticity_growth_magnitude
VorticityGrowthMagnitudeABS             vorticity_growth_magnitude_absolute
VorticityGrowthTimescale                vorticity_growth_timescale
VorticityRadPressureX                   vorticity_radiation_pressure_x
VorticityRadPressureY                   vorticity_radiation_pressure_y
VorticityRadPressureZ                   vorticity_radiation_pressure_z
VorticityRadPressureMagnitude           vorticity_radiation_pressure_magnitude
VorticityRPGrowthX                      vorticity_radiation_pressure_growth_x
VorticityRPGrowthY                      vorticity_radiation_pressure_growth_y
VorticityRPGrowthZ                      vorticity_radiation_pressure_growth_z
VorticityRPGrowthMagnitude              vorticity_radiation_pressure_growth_magnitude
VorticityRPGrowthTimescale              vorticity_radiation_pressure_growth_timescale
x-velocity                              velocity_x
y-velocity                              velocity_y
z-velocity                              velocity_z
======================================  =======================================

Molecular and Atomic Species Names
----------------------------------

Particular care must be taken to name molecular and atomic species in a way
that is unambiguous as well as terse.  We need to be able to resolve the
following types of species:

 * CO (Carbon monoxide)
 * Co (Coblt)
 * OVI (Oxygen ionized five times)
 * H2+ (Molecular Hydrogen ionized once)
 * H- (Hydrogen atom with an additional electron)

The naming scheme we have decided upon is of the form ``MM[_[mp][NN]]``.
``MM`` is the molecule, defined as a concatenation of atomic symbols and
numbers, with no spaces or underscores.  The second sequence is only required
if the ionization state is not neutral, and is of the form ``p`` and ``m`` to
indicate "plus" or "minus" respectively, followed by the number.  Our examples
above would be ``CO``, ``Co``, ``O_p5``, ``H2_p1``, and ``H_m1``.  Note that we
are *not* using an exclusively-lowercase convention here, as we did for the
other field names.  The name ``De`` will be reserved for electron fields, as it
is unambiguous and will not be utilized elsewhere.  Additionally, the isotope
of ``2H`` will be included as ``D``.

Finally, in those frontends which are single-fluid, we will define these fields
for each species:

  * ``_fraction``
  * ``_number_density``
  * ``_density``
  * ``_mass``

This means that if a frontend only has color fields and species fields (as is
the most common case), it will have ``("gas", "H2_fraction")`` for instance.
Otherwise, for multi-fluid calculations (where ``gas`` is joined by other
fields) the other fields will have their own mass and density and so on.

This will require some parsing, and initially we will only support those fields
we expect to find.  Additionally, because different frontends define these
fields in different ways, we will detect which one is the output and define the
rest from that.  For example, if the frontend finds a ``_density`` field, the
rest will be computed as derived fields from that.

As a point of clarification, the ``De_density`` currently defined for
Enzo is scaled with respect to the ratio of the electron to proton mass ratio.
This means that dividing it by ``m_h`` will result in the number density.
Moving forward, this *will not be the case*.  We will instead give correct
results for mass density when the *alias* is queried.  The original name,
``Electron_Density``, will still be defined the way it currently is, to
preserve access to the original, on-disk fields.  (It will be able to be
converted to CGS, as well, and will not be scaled in doing so.)
