YTEP-0008: Release Schedule
===========================

Abstract
--------

Created: February 21, 2013
Author: Matthew Turk

The yt release schedule is somewhat dysfunctional in several ways.  Release
dates can be difficult to stick to, and merges to stable occur only after long
periods.  This results in bug fixes not propagating and increases the pressure
on developers for a given "release," as each release is seen as monumental
rather than incremental.  This YTEP describes a new mechanism for increasing
the cadence of point releases as well as merging from the development branch
into the stable branch.

Status
------

Proposed

Project Management Links
------------------------

The Mercurial time based release plan, which has partially inspired this
discussion, is available here:
http://mercurial.selenic.com/wiki/TimeBasedReleasePlan .

Detailed Description
--------------------

The yt release schedule is irregular.  Here's a table of the releases over
time, along with the number of days since the most recent major (i.e.,
non-point) release.

======= ============ ===============
Version Release Date Days Since Last
======= ============ ===============
1.0.1   2008-10-25   N/A
1.5     2009-11-04   375
1.6     2010-01-22   79
1.6.1   2010-02-11   N/A
1.7     2010-06-27   156
2.0     2011-01-17   204
2.0.1   2011-01-20   N/A
2.1     2011-04-06   79
2.2     2011-09-02   149
2.3     2011-12-15   104
2.4     2012-08-02   231
2.5     2013-03-01   211
2.5.1   2013-03-31   30
2.5.2   2013-05-01   30
2.5.3   2013-06-03   33
2.5.4   2013-07-02   29
======= ============ ===============

In principle, a long release schedule is not a problem.  However, what this
results in is a reluctance to merge to the stable branch.  This has two major
side effects: it leads to many people working off of the development branch and
it leads to a long time between bug fixes for individuals working off of the
stable branch.  The development branch, despite its name, is quite stable --
however, this also means that when instabilities (or API changes) are
introduced in the development branch, it can be much more disruptive.

What Constitutes a Release
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The majority of development in the primary yt repository is stable.  Seldom are
backwards-incompatible changes introduced, nor functionality broken.  This is
helped by continuous integration and detailed code review.  As such, for the
most part, yt is in a constant state of "release."

For the purposes of this document, a "release" constitutes five things:

  * A new build of the documentation with API and cookbook is placed in a
    long-term container.
  * The development branch (``yt``) is merged to the stable branch (``stable``)
  * A new tag in the version control history
  * An upload of the source code to PyPI ( http://pypi.python.org/ )
  * An announcement email (to ``yt-users`` for minor releases and more broadly
    for major releases)

Standards for Changes to the Code
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

This YTEP proposes a change in structure to the release system, but for this to
succeed it *requires* new standards for acceptances of pull requests.  These
standards are currently being added to the development documentation, and this
YTEP cannot be accepted until they are.  Modifications to the code typically
fall into one of three categories, each of which have different requirements
for acceptance into the code base.

  * New Features

    * New unit tests (possibly new answer tests)
    * Docstrings for public API
    * Addition of new feature to the narrative documentation
    * Addition of cookbook recipe
    * Issue created on issue tracker, to ensure this is added to the changelog

  * Extension or Breakage of API in Existing Features

    * Update existing narrative docs and docstrings
    * Update existing cookbook recipes
    * Modify of create new unit tests
    * Issue created on issue tracker, to ensure this is added to the changelog

  * Bug fixes

    * Unit test is encouraged, to ensure breakage does not happen again in the
      future.
    * Issue created on issue tracker, to ensure this is added to the changelog

Without ensuring that all of these standards are met, the likely outcome is
that during the process of release, components of these will be put off and
procrastinated, leading to a bunching up of work at the end of the release
cycle.  By front-loading the work, the process of release is much easier, and
the reliability of the resultant code is much higher.

This proposed change in the release cycle is not just about releasing more
frequently, but about more evenly distributing work that contributes to a
release.  If docs and tests are added as features are created, the barrier to
merging to stable is reduced.

Long Term Support Branch
++++++++++++++++++++++++

As development on underlying infrastructure of yt continues apace, we must
provide long-term support for the existing infrastructure.  As such, we will
continue to provide (time, effort and need permitting) the existing 2.X
branches with criticla bugfixes.

Here is an outline of the release dates for the remainder of 2013.  This YTEP
will be updated as time goes on with additional release dates for long-term
stability, but currently it is anticipated that this release schedule will
relax over time once the next-generation branch (described below) becomes
viable.

======= ============
Version Release Date
======= ============
2.6     2013-08-01
2.6.1   2013-09-01
2.6.2   2013-10-01
2.6.3   2013-11-01
2.6.4   2013-12-01
2.7     2014-01-01
======= ============ 

Next-Generation Branch
++++++++++++++++++++++

yt 3.0 (described elsewhere) is a major rethinking of the mechanisms by which
yt manipulates data in memory.  As such, it by necessity breaks some
functionality, changes some functionality, and enables some functionality.  A
full description of the changes in yt 3.0 is outside the scope of this
document.

However, because it is under active development without a clear
production-level date in mind, a different release structure is envisioned for
it.  A series of preview releases will be tagged and announced, but not
uploaded to PyPI or merged into stable.

These releases will be announced with the caveat that they are *preview*
releases, and bug fixes will be solicited.  They will be conducted every two
months, rather than every month, as the relative value of releasing alpha
releases to a developer community is much smaller.

======= ============
Version Release Date
======= ============
3.0a1   2013-03-15
3.0a2   2013-06-01
3.0a3   2013-07-15
3.0a4   2013-09-01
3.0a5   2013-10-15
======= ============ 

This YTEP will be updated as milestones are met and the development trajectory
of yt 3.0 is more clearly evaluated.

Release Managers
++++++++++++++++

The release manager for minor releases will be Matthew Turk, as they will only
be announced to ``yt-users``.  For major releases, a new release manager will
be selected by consensus in the ``yt-dev`` community.  Merging, tagging and
uploading will be handled by Matthew Turk, but the release manager will act as
"whip" to ensure the necessary documentation building is done.  Additionally,
this release manager will write the release notes and send the email to various
mailing lists.

======= ===============
Version Release Manager
======= ===============
2.5     John ZuHone
2.5.1   Matthew Turk
2.5.2   Matthew Turk
2.5.3   Matthew Turk
2.6     Unknown
2.6.1   Matthew Turk
2.6.2   Matthew Turk
2.6.3   Matthew Turk
2.7     Unknown
======= ===============

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

This should have no backwards-incompatible changes.

Alternatives
------------

One alternative would be to forego release numbers and move to completely
continuous integration.  Another would be to continue on our current path.
