YTEP-0038: Type Annotations
===========================

Abstract
--------

Created: March 1, 2021
Author: Matthew Turk, Corentin Cadiou, Clément Robert

This YTEP proposes that we undertake a staged process of adding [type
annotations](https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html) to the yt
codebase.

Status
------

Proposed, after havingbeen discussed.

Project Management Links
------------------------

  * [PR 3064 - Add a `_typing` module](https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3064)
  * [PR 3028 - pyannotate for type hints](https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3028)
  * [PR 2917 - Drop support for Py 3.6](https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/2917)
  * [PR 2352 - Experiment with type hinting](https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/2352)
  * [Somewhat related YTEP on traitlets](https://github.com/yt-project/ytep/pull/8)

Additionally, the [pull request for this
YTEP](https://github.com/yt-project/ytep/pull/17) is an invaluable source of
information and discussion.

Detailed Description
--------------------

In the 3.x series, Python had added support for type annotations/hinting.
These are optional annotations that specify what types a given function
expects to receive or to emit.

This allows a number of useful features, chief among them a more rigorous
method for error-checking in code and a way to provide much better
autocompletion and IDE functionality for developing both scripts *and* code
within yt.  If your IDE is aware of what kinds of objects will be returned by 
a function, it can then provide options about what you might be able to do
with that object. A recent summary (as of this writing) can be found
[here](https://www.augmentedmind.de/2020/10/11/static-python-type-hints/).

There are also possibilities of future optimizations that can build on type
hinting, for instance in tools like Cython and Numba, but that is not
considered a top-tier reason for adding type hints.

However, there are some features of type-hinting that would be extremely
useful to yt that only started appearing in Python 3.7. Part of this
discussion should be around when to require Python 3.7 and above.

Implementing type annotations across an entire codebase such as yt is a
daunting task. There are many, many internal functions that would benefit
from type annotations. Instead, it would be most useful to take a staged
approach, utilizing automated conversion tools where possible with
hand-reviews of these *internal* items.

For user-facing items, in particular anything in the *high-level* APIs (i.e.,
data selectors, `SlicePlot`, etc) a personal touch should be used, and each
should be written by a developer.

Because this is a big task, the order of modifications we propose would be:

 * *Immediately* allow type hinting in new pull requests and code
   modifications.
 * *Immediately* allow the inclusion of a type hinting module, and open for
   discussion the usage of that module and its makeup.
 * Identify any type hint `Union` types that need to be made (to account for,
   for instance, supplying either a `unyt_quantity` or a tuple of (value,
   unit))
 * Type-hint constructors for all top-level objects (`SlicePlot`, `Sphere`, etc)
 * Type-hint all visualization function calls (`p.set_width`)
 * Type-hint public methods on top-level objects (`.profile`)
 * Utilize annotators for internal (underscore) methods.

This will need to be a series of pull requests.

Because these hints will be integrated into the testing suites, we can have
an additional check of static analysis of our testing suites and examples.
This should ease the development process, as an error will be raised for
invalid API uses or incorrect type annotations.

Guidelines for Typing in yt
---------------------------

 * "Don't Repeat Yourself": All internal typing should be imported either
   from `typing` or from `yt.typing`, except classes (that should be imported
   from their respective files directly) and functions that return or take as
   inputs objects from foreign libraries (e.g. that export pandas
   dataframes). We should avoid as much as possible code repetition in
   function signatures, except where it helps understanding the signature
   itself (i.e. `Tuple[str, str]` may be clearer than `StrTuple`)
 * "Type for users then for the machine": Typing should help users and
   developers first, and be machine readable then. This means that complex
   types should be defined as their own meaningful type and stored in
   `yt/typing.py`.
 * "Favour clean signature over history": Inevitably we will hit a function
   with very complex signatures/variable return types. We should favour
   refactoring it if that can contribute to simplifying the signature.

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Unless Python 3.7 or above features of type hinting are used, this should not
have any backwards-incompatible changed.

The primary Python 3.7 feature we would want to take advantage of is deferred
evaluation. The example given in discussion is a return type of a class that
does not exist yet; to retain Python 3.6 compatibility we would use a string
literal for the time-being.

Alternatives
------------

None that I can identify.