YTEP-0040: a yt-baked colormap package
======================================

Abstract
--------

Created: 20 April, 2021 (happy 40th birthday Matt !)
Author: Clément Robert

I propose to extract native colormaps ("cmaps" hereafter) from yt into a separate, lightweight package.

Status
------

Completed

Project Management Links
------------------------

PRs following the release of Matplotlib 3.4
  * remove duplicated (vendored) cmaps from matpltolib (cubehelix in `#3149 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3149>`_ and turbo in `#3137 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3137>`_)
  * stop registering colormaps from cmocean `#3175 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3175>`_
  * add a visible deprecation warning for unprefixed cmocean maps (`#3214 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3214>`_)
  * document the deprecation above `#3207 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3207>`_
  * bugfix an undesirable side effect from #3175 `#3212 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/3212>`_

GH issue with the initial discussion `#3165 <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/issues/3165>`_

The new package's home is `https://github.com/yt-project/cmyt <https://github.com/yt-project/cmyt>`_

Detailed Description
--------------------

An undocumented behaviour change in Matplotlib 3.4.0 made naming collisions in cmaps
fatal. Registering a new cmap with a previously registered name will not work any more,
and cause the program to crash.
Up to yt 3.6, we've been automatically registering cmaps from various sources. Most notably:
- yt itself
- IDL
- `cmocean <https://matplotlib.org/cmocean/>`_
  
All of the cmaps in questions are (or used to be) registered with bare names, i.e.
without a dedicated prefix. This means that if any of our cmaps' names is used in the
future release of Matplotlib, importing yt will fail with a ``ValueError``.

Good practice is in fact to register cmaps under a custom "namespace" (prefix) that is
guaranted to never collide with matplotlib native colormpas. This is what is currently
done in cmocean itself (prefixing with ``"cmo."``) as well as, for instance `cmasher <https://cmasher.readthedocs.io>`_
(prefixing with ``"cmr."``).

Since migrating away from the fragile current registration method requires a structural
change anyway, I propose we seize the opportunity to make yt native cmaps easier to use
from outside the framework (to footnote: it is actually already doable but it requires loading the entire package)
and export them into a small, lightweight, easy to maintain and install package.

Such a package would be a hard dependency of yt itself.

In case this proposal is accepted, the exact prefix used is up for discussion. I can propose
1) ``cmy.`` pros: perfectly fits the dominant convention, cons: doesn't look like yt
1) ``yt.`` pros: dead simple, best at "brand" reinforcement, cons: doesn't align with the dominant convention
1) ``cmyt.`` pros: has "yt" _and_ "cm" in the name, cons: one char more that the dominant convention

My personal preference goes to ``cmyt.``, and I'm going with it as the proposed package
name in the following.

NOTE: the fate of IDL orignated colormaps currently registered and vendored by yt is not
clear. They could be ported as yet another package (and maybe made a hard dep to yt
too ?), or be included in the first package (not my favourite option).


Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Forcing people to add prefixes everywhere is not (yet ?) necessary, but the practice
should be encouraged nevertheless. One way to bridge the gap between current
"malpractice" and a more stable usage in yt would be to perfom reregistrations of
``cmyt``'s cmaps without a prefix (similarly to what was previously done with cmocean,
though in an error-safe way).

Maybe this could be done silently in yt 4.0 (to save our users as much of a migration
burden as possible), then raise visible deprecation warnings starting from yt 4.1, and
finally be completely deprecated in yt 4.2 or yt 4.3 . 


Alternatives
------------

- Perform structural changes in how yt registers its own cmaps (necessary) without making
the result a new package (not necessary, but offers some additional benefits).

- Perform the necessary changes on yt side, export the cmaps into a separate package but
  keep them in the main package too (code duplication, not my cup of tea).
