YTEP-0023: yt Community Code of Conduct
=======================================

Abstract
--------

Created: July 11, 2015

Author: Britton Smith

This document contains the code of conduct for the yt community.  It is a
near exact copy of the `Astropy Community Code of Conduct 
<https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE8.rst>`__, except 
that we will employ our own confidential email address for community 
members to report violations.

Status
------

Completed

Project Management Links
------------------------

  * `Astropy Communitiy Code of Conduct 
    <http://www.astropy.org/about.html#codeofconduct>`_

Detailed Description
--------------------

The code of conduct, whose language is below, will be displayed in the 
following places:

  * Developer Documentation

  * yt Project `About page
    <http://yt-project.org/about.html#codeofconduct>`_

  * yt Project `Community page
    <http://yt-project.org/community.html#codeofconduct>`_

  * yt Project `Development page
    <http://yt-project.org/development.html#codeofconduct>`_

Emails sent to the confidential address will be seen by Hilary Egan, 
Britton Smith, and John Zuhone.

yt Community Code of Conduct
----------------------------

The community of participants in open source 
Scientific projects is made up of members from around the
globe with a diverse set of skills, personalities, and
experiences. It is through these differences that our
community experiences success and continued growth. We
expect everyone in our community to follow these guidelines
when interacting with others both inside and outside of our
community. Our goal is to keep ours a positive, inclusive,
successful, and growing community.

As members of the community,

- We pledge to treat all people with respect and
  provide a harassment- and bullying-free environment,
  regardless of sex, sexual orientation and/or gender
  identity, disability, physical appearance, body size,
  race, nationality, ethnicity, and religion. In
  particular, sexual language and imagery, sexist,
  racist, or otherwise exclusionary jokes are not
  appropriate.

- We pledge to respect the work of others by
  recognizing acknowledgment/citation requests of
  original authors. As authors, we pledge to be explicit
  about how we want our own work to be cited or
  acknowledged.

- We pledge to welcome those interested in joining the
  community, and realize that including people with a
  variety of opinions and backgrounds will only serve to
  enrich our community. In particular, discussions
  relating to pros/cons of various technologies,
  programming languages, and so on are welcome, but
  these should be done with respect, taking proactive
  measure to ensure that all participants are heard and
  feel confident that they can freely express their
  opinions.

- We pledge to welcome questions and answer them
  respectfully, paying particular attention to those new
  to the community. We pledge to provide respectful
  criticisms and feedback in forums, especially in
  discussion threads resulting from code
  contributions.

- We pledge to be conscientious of the perceptions of
  the wider community and to respond to criticism
  respectfully. We will strive to model behaviors that
  encourage productive debate and disagreement, both
  within our community and where we are criticized. We
  will treat those outside our community with the same
  respect as people within our community.

- We pledge to help the entire community follow the
  code of conduct, and to not remain silent when we see
  violations of the code of conduct. We will take action
  when members of our community violate this code such as
  contacting confidential@yt-project.org (all emails sent to
  this address will be treated with the strictest
  confidence) or talking privately with the person.

This code of conduct applies to all
community situations online and offline, including mailing
lists, forums, social media, conferences, meetings,
associated social events, and one-to-one interactions.

The yt Community Code of Conduct was adapted from the 
`Astropy Community Code of Conduct 
<http://www.astropy.org/about.html#codeofconduct>`__,
which was partially inspired by the PSF code of conduct.

Alternatives
------------

None.
