.. _ytep-0000:

YTEP-0000: Project Governance
=============================

Abstract
--------

Created: August 24, 2014
Author: Britton Smith
Modified: August 09, 2019
Author: Madicken Munk

This document describes the high-level structure, policies, procedures, and processes
of the yt project.

Status
------

Completed

Project Management Links
------------------------

  * `Apache Software Foundation <http://incubator.apache.org/>`__
  * Initial governance discussion on yt-dev: `here <http://lists.spacepope.org/pipermail/yt-dev-spacepope.org/2014-August/013549.html>`__.
  * Secondary discussion about need to update governance from yt-exec: `here <https://github.com/yt-project/project-records/blob/master/meeting-notes/notes-20190528.md>`__. 

Detailed Description
--------------------

Motivation
^^^^^^^^^^

The yt project consists of a number of repositories within the yt project
organization. The organization itself has a number of people interacting with
and contributing to these associated repositories. Here we propose a broad
overview of the governance model of the project, which will be detailed in a
specific governance repository within the yt project, at:
https://github.com/yt-project/governance. Major changes to the governance model
will be iterated upon here, and details about the model will happen in the
governance repository. This will allow small changes within the governance
documentation to move quickly and not need to go through a major vote to update
the YTEP. 

Structure
^^^^^^^^^

The governance document will do the following

  * Define where the governance documents apply, and how to override them, if
    relevant
  * Provide guidelines on project licensing
  * Link to the Code of Conduct, state what happens if a violation occurs, and
    what avenues are available for reporting violations
  * State how conflicts of interest are handled among voting members of the
    community
  * State who the voting members of the community are
  * Outline and define the roles within the project, including: 
    contributors, developers, reviewers, and maintainers 
  * Define how to become a project member, what expections exist for project
    members, how to become an emeritus member of the project, 
    and how to revoke project membership
  * Define how to become a steering committee member, what expections exist for
    steering committee members, and how members are voted into the steering
    committee, and how long membership on the steering committee lasts
  * Create a project leadership structure that facilites project
    sustainability, inclusive onboarding practices, and mentorship to learn and
    understand packages/subpackages within the yt project. 
  * Make clear guidelines on how voting occurs for changes in the project,
    including:

    * minor documentation changes
    * code changes and major documentation changes
    * changes to API principles and changes to dependencies or supported versions
    * changes to the project governance
    * project membership.

  * State when project meetings happen, at what frequency that they occur,
    how they are announced to the community, and where they are documented. 

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Sic semper inordinatio.

Alternatives
------------

The alternative is to continue with no official guidelines and somehow manage,
or to continue with an older version of the governance model. 
