YTEP-0025: The ytdata Frontend
==============================

Abstract
--------

Created: August 31, 2015
Author: Britton Smith

This YTEP proposes to make data products created by yt into loadable
datasets.  Primarily, this will provide the following features:

  * exporting geometric data containers to datasets that can be reloaded 
    for further geometric selection and analysis.

  * exporting plot-type data (projections, slices, profiles) so that they 
    can be moved, reloaded, and manipulated to make new images.

Status
------

Completed

Project Management Links
------------------------

  * `yt PR #1718 <https://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis/yt/pull-requests/1718/wip-adding-ytdata-frontend>`_: 
    the accepted pull request containing the full implementation

Detailed Description
--------------------

Currently, yt's main data products (data containers, projections, slices,
profiles) can only be used with their full functionality with the original 
dataset loaded.  This is cumbersome when the datasets are so large that they 
can only be hosted at remote facilities.  Creating publication-quality images 
from such data either requires a cycle of tweaking, transferring, viewing, 
and cursing or creating custom intermediate data products and plotting codes.

This YTEP proposes to create functionality that will allow for the above 
data products to be exported to a format that can be reloaded as a 
full-fledged dataset.

The proposed functionality consists of two main components: functionality to 
save objects to disk and a frontend responsible for reloading the saved 
objects.

Exporting
^^^^^^^^^

A general function for saving array data associated with an open dataset 
will be responsible for writing data to disk.  Data will be written to a 
single hdf5 file.  Metadata associated with the dataset (i.e., current_time, 
current_redshift, cosmological parameters, domain dimensions) will be saved as 
attributes of the root file group.  By default, data will be saved to a "grid" 
group with "units" attributes saved for each dataset.  This function is 
implemented as ``save_as_dataset`` in ``yt/frontends/ytdata/utilities.py``
and imported in the main yt import.

The above function will be called by the user-facing functions,
``YTDataContainer.save_as_dataset``, ``ProfileND.save_as_dataset``, and
``FixedResolutionBuffer.save_as_dataset``, which will optionally take a
filename and a list of fields.  If no field list is given, then the fields
that have been queried and cached will be saved.  This function will also
make sure that fields necessary for geometric selection (grid position/cell
size, particle position) are also saved.  Mesh data will be saved to the
"grid" group and particle data will be saved to groups named after the
specific particle type.

ytdata Frontend
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This frontend will be responsible for reloading all data saved with the above 
method.  As this data is of multiple types, this will actually be multiple 
frontends living under the general "ytdata" heading.  All dataset types will
inherit from the ``YTDataset`` class.  See :ref:`ytdataset-types` for a
description of each class.  For each loaded dataset, ``ds``, in the ytdata
frontend, ``ds.data`` will provide direct access to the field data.

Geometrical Data Containers
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Fields queried from data containers are returned as unordered, one-dimension 
arrays and, thus, most closely resemble particle datasets.  All geometric data 
containers are reloaded as type ``YTDataContainerDataset``, which is a particle 
dataset type.  Mesh data is stored with the corresponding ``dx``, ``dy``, and
``dz`` fields such that derived fields like ``cell_volume`` can be created.  All
mesh data is aliased to the "gas" field type.  The ``data`` attribute associated
with the loaded dataset will be a data container configured identically to the
original data container.  In the case of ray data containers, this is not
possible as a ray is defined by cells it intersects and not cells/particles
enclosed within.  In this case, ``data`` will be an instance of
``ds.all_data()``.  Field access through conventional data containers is
also possible.

.. code-block:: python

   ds = yt.load("enzo_tiny_cosmology/DD0046/DD0046")

   sphere = ds.sphere([0.5]*3, (10, "Mpc"))
   sphere.save_as_dataset(fields=["density", "particle_mass"])

   sds = yt.load("DD0046_sphere.h5")

   # sphere with the same center and radius
   print (sds.data)
   print (sds.data["grid", "density"])
   print (sds.data["gas", "density"])
   print (sds.data["all", "particle_mass"])
   print (sds.data["all", "particle_position_x"])

   # create a data container
   ad = sds.all_data()
   print (ad["grid", "density"])
   print (ad["all", "particle_mass"])

Grid Data Containers
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Covering grids, smoothed covering grids, and arbitrary grids return 3D arrays 
and so can be treated as uniform grid datasets.  After being saved with 
``save_as_dataset``, these are reloaded as type ``YTGridDataset``, which is a uniform 
grid that also supports particles.  ``FixedResolutionBuffer`` objects saved
with ``save_as_dataset`` will be reloaded as this type as well, only 2D.  
In this case, ``ds.data`` will give access to the multi-dimensional field arrays.

.. code-block:: python

   ds = yt.load("enzo_tiny_cosmology/DD0046/DD0046")

   cg = ds.covering_grid(level=0, left_edge=[0.25]*3, dims=[16]*3)
   cg.save_as_dataset("cg.h5", ["density", "particle_mass"])
   cg_ds = yt.load("cg.h5")

   # this has the dimensions of the original covering grid
   print (cg_ds.data["gas", "density"]).shape

   # access via geometric selection
   ad = cg_ds.all_data()
   print (ad["gas", "density"])
   print (ad["all", "particle_mass"])

   ray = cg_ds.ray(cg_ds.domain_left_edge, cg_ds.domain_right_edge)
   print (ray["gas", "density"])

   # FRBs
   proj = ds.proj("density", "x", weight_field="density")
   frb = proj.to_frb(1.0, (800, 800))
   frb.save_as_dataset(fields=["density"])
   fds = yt.load("DD0046_proj_frb.h5")
   print (fds.data["density"])

Projections and Slices
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Projections and slices are like two-dimensional particle datasets where the x and 
y fields are "px" and "py".  They are reloaded as type ``YTProjectionDataset``, 
which is a subclass of ``YTDataContainerDataset``.  Reloaded projection or slice
data can be selected geometrically or fed into a ``ProjectionPlot`` or
``SlicePlot``.  In these cases, ``ds.data`` is an instance of ``ds.all_data()``.

.. code-block:: python

   ds = yt.load("enzo_tiny_cosmology/DD0046/DD0046")

   proj = ds.proj("density", "x", weight_field="density")
   proj.save_as_dataset("proj.h5")

   gds = yt.load("proj.h5")
   print (gds.data["gas", "density"])
   p = yt.ProjectionPlot(gds, "x", "density", weight_field="density")
   p.save()

The above would enable someone to make projections or slices of large datasets
remotely, then download the exported dataset, and perfect the final image on a 
local machine.  On and off-axis slices are implemented.  Off-axis projections
are not implemented at this time as they use totally different machinery.  In
this case, the best strategy would be to create an FRB and call
``save_as_dataset`` on that.

General Array Data
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Array data written with the base ``save_as_dataset`` function can be reloaded 
as a non-spatial dataset.  Geometric selection is not possible, but the data 
can be accessed through the ``YTNonspatialGrid`` object, ``ds.data``.  This object
will only grab data from the hdf5 file and do further selection on it.

.. code-block:: python

   from yt.frontends.ytdata.api import save_as_dataset

   ds = yt.load("enzo_tiny_cosmology/DD0046/DD0046")

   region = ds.box([0.25]*3, [0.75]*3)
   sphere = ds.sphere(ds.domain_center, (10, "Mpc"))

   my_data = {}
   my_data["region_density"] = region["density"]
   my_data["sphere_density"] = sphere["density"]
   save_as_dataset(ds, "test_data.h5", my_data)

   ads = yt.load("test_data.h5")
   print (ads.data["region_density"])
   print (ads.data["sphere_density"])

Profiles
%%%%%%%%

1, 2, and 3D profiles are like 1, 2, and 3D uniform grid datasets where dx, dy, 
and dz are different and have different dimensions.  ``YTProfileDataset``
objects inherit from the ``YTNonspatialDataset`` class.  Similarly, the data
can be accessed from ``ds.data``.  The x and y bins will be saved as 1D fields
and fields named after the x and y bin field names will be saved with the same
shape as the actual profile data.  This will allow for easy array slicing of the
profile based on the bin fields.

.. code-block:: python

   ds = yt.load("enzo_tiny_cosmology/DD0046/DD0046")
   profile = yt.create_profile(ds.all_data(), ["density", "temperature"],
                               "cell_mass", weight_field=None)
   profile.save_as_dataset()

   pds = yt.load("DD0046_profile.h5")
   # print the profile data
   print pds.data["cell_mass"]
   # print the x and y bins
   print pds.data["x"], pds.data["y"]
   # bin data shaped like the profile
   print pds.data["density"]
   print pds.data["temperature"]

.. _ytdataset-types:

ytdata Dataset Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

========================== ========================== ========================= ============ ===================
Name                        Inheritance               Purpose                   Dataset Type Geometric Selection
========================== ========================== ========================= ============ ===================
``YTDataset``              ``Dataset``                common functionality for  n/a          n/a
                                                      other dataset types
``YTDataContainerDataset`` ``YTDataset``              geometric data containers particle     yes
                                                      (sphere, region, ray, 
                                                      disk)
``YTSpatialPlotDataset``   ``YTDataContainerDataset`` projections, slices,      particle     yes
                                                      cutting planes
``YTGridDataset``          ``YTDataset``              covering grids,           grid         yes
                                                      arbitrary grids,          w/particles
                                                      fixed resolution buffers
``YTNonspatialDataset``    ``YTGridDataset``          general array data        grid         no
``YTProfileDataset``       ``YTNonspatialDataset``    1, 2, and 3D profiles     grid         no
========================== ========================== ========================= ============ ===================

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Currently, the only API breakage is in the ``AbsorptionSpectrum``.   
Previously, it accepted a generic hdf5 file created by the ``LightRay``.  
As per the `open PR <https://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis/yt/pull-requests/1718/wip-adding-ytdata-frontend>`_,
the ``LightRay`` now writes out a yt.loadable dataset that is loaded by the 
``AbsorptionSpectrum``.

Other than the above, this is all new functionality and so has no backward 
incompatibility.  One general change made to the yt codebase is that places
that refer to ``index`` fields (``x``, ``y``, ``z``, ``dx``, etc.) now refer
to ``(<fluid_type>, "dx")`` instead of ``("index", "dx")``.  This is to allow
fields like ``cell_volume`` to be created from the ``("grid", "dx")`` field
that, for the ytdata frontend, lives on disk instead of the version being
generated by the geometry handler.  For actual grid datasets, we simply
create an alias from ``(<fluid_type>, "dx")`` to ``("index", "dx")`` upon
loading.  This should be completely transparent to the user.

Alternatives
------------

We could create custom binary files for every type of plot and data 
container.  We could also revive the concept of saving pickled objects 
that was used somewhat in yt-2.
