YTEP-0029: Extension Packages
=============================

Abstract
--------

Created: January 25, 2016

Author: Matthew Turk

The yt project is not the same as the yt codebase.  However, the bundling of
analysis modules and maintaining a monolithic repository tends to blur the
distinction between the two.  This YTEP is an attempt to identify how we can
make the codebase more friendly to extension modules, and to encourage an
ecosystem of independently developed packages that utilize yt.

Status
------

This YTEP is proposed.

Project Management Links
------------------------

There has been discussion on yt-dev about this, but due to Dreamhost's constant
problems with archiving mail, they may be gone forever, about which I will
refrain from editorializing here.

Detailed Description
--------------------

This YTEP proposes a few courses of action designed to promote the idea of yt
as a dependency, rather than a destination, for analysis modules and external
projects.

As it stands, many (the author included) have viewed yt as the "place" to put
things, whether or not they contribute to its core mission.  There are several
good reasons for this:

 * **Distribution**: yt is largely a monolithic codebase, and if you have
   downloaded and installed yt, you have access to all of the analysis modules.
   This makes discoverability and distribution much easier.
 * **Infrastructure**: yt has testing infrastructure which gets run on all pull
   requests and new revisions.  As such, if the analysis module is in the
   primary codebase, it too will be tested.  If functionality in yt changes,
   the analysis module will track this.  Additionally, we provide the ability
   to run tests on managed infrastructure.
 * **Prestige**: (maybe?)  Having something be a part of yt adds to the sense
   that it's part of the bigger project, and that it's somehow graduated to a
   stable component.  (I am not sure this is real, but it's been mentioned to
   me.)
 * **Social infrastructure**: There's a mailing list for yt, so folks know
   where to go.

But, there are several -- sometimes quite large -- downsides to being part of
the mainline yt codebase.

 * **Project Standards**: The methods right now for developing in yt require
   several iterations of code review as well as conforming to standards of
   development practices.  For instance, this could include style or where the
   code is developed (i.e., bitbucket/github/kallithea/etc).
 * **Credit**: While the situation is certainly improving, and there is nothing
   to stop a contributor from writing a paper describing a new analysis module
   (in fact this is encouraged) it is still a part of a "project" codebase
   rather than a standalone entity.  This can diminish the perception of
   individual contributions, particularly by people not directly affiliated
   with the mainline yt project.
 * **Timeline**: The acceptance of a change into yt can often be on a weeks or
   longer timescale, depending largely on the time being issuing a pull request
   and the next PR triage.  For modules that are developed with much higher
   frequency, this can be very cumbersome and costly in developer efforts.
 * **Dependencies**: yt attempts to keep the number of dependencies at a
   minimum; if a package wants to use them, it often has to either make them
   on-demand or vendor them with the source.  We want to encourage packages to
   utilize new technologies and experiment -- but at present, we can't allow
   that into mainline.

A solution to this problem would be to encourage an ecosystem of discoverable
packages that build on yt as a dependency.  Three such packages exist at time
of writing -- powderday, trident, and astroblend.

What this YTEP proposes is to restructure our discussion of yt as a project to
emphasize these types of packages and projects as citizens in the community,
and provide to them a mechanism for people to find them.

This will take a few forms:

 * Re-designing the website to emphasize the burgeoning ecosystem of projects,
   perhaps similar to the way astropy.org is set up.
 * Offering, but not mandating, projects that they should direct questions to
   the yt-users mailing list.
 * Splitting out some particularly isolated projects from analysis modules.
   This may include photon simulator and the sz generator.
 * Provide entry points *in the code* for people to find out about available
   analysis modules.  (Discussed below.)
 * Utilize intersphinx documentation links for analysis modules, *or* offer to
   host documentation on the main yt homepage.
 * Determine mechanisms for recognizing projects as extensions, independent,
   related, etc.

At present, people can find analysis modules by doing something like:::

   >>> dir(yt.amods)

This returns a list of analysis modules.  This could be extended to *also*
parse a small list of known external projects which could be installed.
Importing one that was not installed would report that it wasn't installed and
describe a method for installing it.

Depending on the type of project, we may want to distinguish between yt
extensions and projects that share the yt ecosystem.  For the former, we could
evaluate using ``yt.extension`` as the namespace, if ``yt.analysis_module`` is
not appropriate.  This would then provide (similar to how Flask `manages
extension modules <http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.10/extensiondev/>`_) a naming
scheme (say, ``ytext_projectname``) that would be imported into
``yt.extension``.  This is not necessary, but is a possibility within the scope
of this YTEP.

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

If we split out existing modules, they would need to be API compatible.  We
would also want to make sure that they are well-supported by our
infrastructure.

Alternatives
------------

One possible alternative would be to make the ``yt.analysis_modules`` namespace
a free-for-all of modifications, with much shorter timescales and essentially
autonomous operation by developers.
