YTEP-0002: Profile Plotter
==========================

Abstract
--------

Created: December 5, 2012
Author: Matthew Turk

This YTEP describes a profile plotting solution, in the style of the
PlotWindow, to replace the functionality of the methods on the
``PlotCollection`` that create profiles.  It should have sane defaults, a
restricted set of functionality, and should make accessing the underlying
matplotlib axes object very easy.

The method proposed needs to meet several competing needs.  It should accept
objects, it should "do the right thing" for auto-creating profiles, it should
provide access to 

Status
------

In Progress: A basic implementation has been created, which now needs to be
modified and changed in accordance with this YTEP.

The code can be seen in ``yt/visualization/profile_plotter.py``, specifically
the objects:

 * ``PhasePlotter``
 * ``ProfilePlotter``

Project Management Links
------------------------

  * `Mailing list discussion <http://lists.spacepope.org/pipermail/yt-dev-spacepope.org/2012-December/002700.html>`_
  * `Example notebook <https://hub.yt-project.org/nb/vlilvw>`_

Detailed Description
--------------------

Motivation
++++++++++

The ``PlotCollection`` provides an easy way to quickly make profiles and phase
plots, both from spheres that it will create and from objects.  However, it
suffers from a number of deficiencies:

 * Accessing the axes objects from matplotlib is non-trivial
 * Plotting multiple profiles on the same axes object is non-trivial
 * The profile plotter tries to do too many things, and in doing so does not do
   anything particularly well
 * Profile plots can't be pickled independently of the data

As such, by including this new approach, we will match the functionality from
these routines:

 * ``add_profile_sphere``
 * ``add_profile_object``
 * ``add_phase_sphere``
 * ``add_phase_object``

in a way that will enable access to the underlying plots, pickling of plots,
and also easier overplotting and multi-plotting.

Implementation
++++++++++++++

The implementation will need to:

 * Accept a data object and set sane defaults for calculating a profile
 * Not add more than one field to the resulting ``BinnedProfile`` object; only
   one will be added at any time, and additional fields will be left up to the
   user
 * Include a standalone ``Plot``-type object that contains all of the necessary
   data to create a representation of the data in Matplotlib.
 * Deposit the plot into an existing ``Axes`` or ``Figure`` object.
 * Provide simple methods of translating the initial Profile data into the
   matplotlib object, and allow the user to modify the visualization as she
   sees fit.

The current implementation contains this class structure:

``ProfilePlotter``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 * ``profile``: property, the BinnedProfile1D
 * ``scale``: "log" or "linear", the scale of the profile's y-axis (x-axis is
   set by the bins in the profile)
 * ``_current_field``: property, the name of the field currently selected
 * ``_setup_plot``: Called to create a new plot specification (*not* a
   Matplotlib plot) and usually called in the background

``PhasePlotter``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 * ``profile``: property, the BinnedProfile2D
 * ``scale``: "log" or "linear", the scale of the profile's y-axis (x-axis
   and y-axis are set by the bins in the profile)
 * ``_current_field``: property, the name of the field currently selected
 * ``_setup_plot``: Called to create a new plot specification (*not* a
   Matplotlib plot) and usually called in the background

``AxisSpec``
^^^^^^^^^^^^

 This specifies the description (title, bounds, scale, ticks)
 of an Axis.  It is typically used without specifying ticks, which are used
 only by the ExtJS widgets.

``ColorbarSpec``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 * ``cmap``: property, string
 * ``display``: property, true or false
 
``PlotContainer``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
 Used for profile plots
 
 * ``x_spec``: property, AxisSpec
 * ``y_spec``: property, AxisSpec
 * ``x_values``: property, numpy array
 * ``y_values``: property, numpy array
 * ``to_mpl``: routine that accepts either (Axes), (Figure), or None.
   Returns the figure and axes after plottin.
 
``ImagePlotContainer`` 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
 Used for phase plots
 
 * ``x_spec``: property, AxisSpec
 * ``y_spec``: property, AxisSpec
 * ``image``: property, numpy array (2D)
 * ``cbar``: property, ``ColorbarSpec`` instance
 * ``to_mpl``: routine that accepts either (Axes), (Figure) or None.  Returns
   the figure and axes after plotting.
  
The indirection enables the user to pickle the plot, without storing the data.
But it comes at the price of clarity.

This is currently implemented, and plots returned for the most part to not
encourage or allow a substantial amount of modification or fiddling.  I think
this is okay, as it will very easily allow users to plot multiple lines into
the same axes, for instance.  However, it does less hand-holding.

Open Questions
++++++++++++++

 * Should the ``PhasePlotter`` and ``ProfilePlotter`` objects be refactored to
   be explicitly favoring matplotlib?  The PlotWindow does this, and it is
   successful.
 * Should we allow users to dynamically switch fields on the fly?
 * Should the desire for pickling of objects be given up in favor of a cleaner
   and simpler class structure?  (i.e., getting rid of the Specification
   objects.)

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

We will not remove the existing functionality from ``PlotCollection``.  So
there are no backwards compatibility issues.

Alternatives
------------

Alternately, we could provide nothing, and encourage users to create their own
``BinnedProfile1D`` plots.  Or, we could provide a much more specific-to-MPL
alternative.
